Hello friends
In this video we will discuss the importance of problem
analysis and logical thinking
So the main idea of programming is to get the
work done by the computer
This means we are asking the computer to solve our
problem by writing the proper program
So what is the first step to solving any problem
The first step to solving the problem is to analyse
the problem and then find a correct logic to implement
it
If we did not have clear logic to solve the
problem we will end up wasting time in implementing wrong
programmes which gives an unexpected result
For example let us take this simple problem of swapping
two numbers
A has the number 3 and B has the number
Our task is to swap the values in between A
and B that is at the end value of A
should be 5 and value of B should be 3
So what will be the logic for this problem?
Can we swap
the values just like that?
Let us try. Let us assign the value 3 to B
Now both A and B has the value 3 and
what happened here? We lost the original value of B
that is 5.
That is the original value of B, 5 is overridden
by the value of A which is 3.
So now we cannot solve this problem as we lost
the actual value of B.
And if we assign the value of B to A
first that also we will lost the original value of
A which is 3
So it is very clear that using this approach we
cannot solve this problem
So what will be the solution? In order to avoid
this situation we should keep one more variable to back up
the actual value of one variable before the assignment
So let us take another variable temp and before assigning
value of B to A back up the value of A
to temp. so temp will have the actual value
of A that is 3. now assign the value of B
to A
So now the value of A will be 5 and
both A and B have the same value
Now Since we already have the original value of A
in temp from temp we can assign the value of
A to B so assign temp to B so now
the value of A will be 3
So we have achieved our task
Now the actual values of A and B were 3 and 5
After the swap operation the updated values of A
and B are 5 and 3
So this is how analysing and logical thinking help us
to speed up the implementation time
If we directly go to writing codes we might end
up implementing wrong logic again and again.
So before implementing actual code we can use these methods
to formulate our thoughts in an organised way
We have algorithm pseudo code and flow chart for this
purpose
So let us discuss about each of these. so what is
an algorithm and algorithm is a step by step method
of solving a problem
We can write an algorithm using simple English
Now let us write the algorithm for swapping two numbers
The first step will be starting the process
Then the next step is to input the first number
to A The third step is to input the second
about to B so we got the two numbers in
A and B now
Now we have to swap them
So using the logic with just discussed we have to
copy one value to a temporary variable as a back
up
So next step is to assign A to temp
And fifth step is to assign B to A and
the sixth step is to assign temp to B
So now the numbers are swapped.
The last step is to stop the process
So that is algorithm the step by step instructions to
solve a problem
See anybody reading this algorithm can understand how we can
swap two numbers A and B
Now let us discuss about pseudo code
The pseudocode is an informal programme description that does
not contain code syntax
That means we don't need to bother about programming
syntax while writing the pseudocode using this pseudo code any
programmer can easily understand your logic
Now let us write the pseudo code for swapping two
numbers first begin now get input A and B which
are the numbers to be swapped next temp equal to A
that is we are assigning A to temp next equal to B
that is we are assigning B to A and next
B equal to temp
That is we are assigning temp which is the original
value of A to B so the swapping is done
Now we can print the swapped values so print A,B
and now we can end the process
So that is pseudo code are it is like a programme
but it is not
There are no rules of syntax and all as the
name pseudo code
It is a fake code
So that's all about pseudocode
Now let us discuss about flow chart A flow chart is
a diagramatic representation of logic or the process
Let's understand what are the major elements in flow chart
and their usage So the first element that we are
going to discuss is an oval shape
It is used to represent the start or stop stage
of a process
Next element is an arrow mark
It is a connector
It connects or relates between various steps of a process
It shows the direction of the process flow
Next element that we have is a parallelogram symbol.
It is used for input or output functions
If we have to get input from user or we
give output to the user we represent that
step using a parallelogram symbol
Next we have a rectangle for processes like mathematical
operations, assignment operations, etcetera
We will use a rectangle shape and finally we
use a diamond shape for decision making steps
You will understand each one's usage very clearly once we
draw flow charts for different problems
Now let us see how to draw flow chart for
our problem which is to swap two numbers so first
Start the process
And as we learned for start and end we will
use an oval shape next get input to A
and B and for input output functions we will use
a parallelogram shape so write input A,B
in a parallelogram and we have to connect it using
the connector symbol
Next we have to copy A to temp B
to A and temp to B which are computations
So we should use a rectangle shape here
Now we can print A and B and it is
an output function so write it in a parallelogram symbol and
finally stop and as we learnt for start and stop
we use an oval shape And it is also important
to connect every stage or step using the connector
So today we learnt the significance of analysing the problem
and logical thinking we can first develop the correct logic
before we can start actual coding and we can use
three methods for that algorithm pseudo court and flow chart
We learnt each one of them in detail
So in the coming videos let us write algorithm pseudo
code and draw flow chart for various problems
So that's all and thank you for watching this video